docs/plans/2026-02-11-containerized-github-actions-onboarding-test.md, before:

# Containerized GitHub Actions Onboarding Test

> **For Claude:** REQUIRED SUB-SKILL: Use superpowers:executing-plans to implement this plan task-by-task.

**Goal:** Build a GitHub Actions workflow that validates the entire bluespeed-onboarding process in a clean Ubuntu environment, ensuring reliable onboarding for new Bluefin maintainers. This workflow will run on every PR and push to main, providing immediate feedback on configuration changes.

**Architecture:** GitHub Actions native workflow using Ubuntu runners (Homebrew pre-installed), executing SKILL.md instructions inline to simulate agent onboarding flow, validating all configurations without requiring MCP server connections.

**Tech Stack:** GitHub Actions, Ubuntu latest runner, Homebrew (pre-installed), jq/yq validation, configuration structure verification

## Why Traditional CI (Not Agentic Actions)

**Decision: Use standard GitHub Actions**

### Rationale for Traditional Approach

**Pros of Traditional GitHub Actions:**
- ✅ **Deterministic** - Same inputs always produce same outputs
- ✅ **Fast** - Cached dependencies, parallel execution
- ✅ **Debuggable** - Clear logs, established tooling
- ✅ **Cost-effective** - Free for public repos, no API calls
- ✅ **Transparent** - Anyone can inspect workflow files
- ✅ **Native integration** - Status checks, badges, branch protection

**Cons of Agentic Actions:**
- ❌ **Non-deterministic** - Agent decisions vary run-to-run
- ❌ **Complex** - Testing agent reliability becomes meta-problem
- ❌ **Costly** - API calls accumulate (OpenAI, Anthropic)
- ❌ **Overkill** - This workflow is linear/procedural
- ❌ **Maintenance** - Agentic frameworks change rapidly

**When Agentic Actions WOULD Make Sense:**
- Adaptive test generation (exploring edge cases dynamically)
- Complex debugging workflows (agent analyzes failures)
- Multi-step integrations (agent coordinates across systems)
- Intelligent triage (agent categorizes failures)

**This workflow is straightforward validation** → Traditional CI is the right tool.

---

## Task 1: Create GitHub Actions Workflow File

**File:** `.github/workflows/test-onboarding.yml`

**Purpose:** Define CI pipeline that validates onboarding in clean environment

**Steps:**

1. **Create workflow directory**
   ```bash
   mkdir -p .github/workflows
   ```

2. **Create `test-onboarding.yml` with:**
   - **Name:** "Bluespeed Onboarding Test"
   - **Triggers:**
     - `push` to `main` branch
     - `pull_request` to `main` branch  
     - `workflow_dispatch` (manual trigger for testing)
   - **Jobs:**
     - `test-opencode-onboarding` - Validates OpenCode setup
     - `test-goose-onboarding` - Validates Goose setup (optional, continue-on-error)
   - **Runner:** `ubuntu-latest` (Homebrew pre-installed by GitHub)
   - **Permissions:** `contents: read` (read-only access)

3. **Add environment variables:**
   ```yaml
   env:
     HOMEBREW_NO_INSTALL_CLEANUP: 1
     HOMEBREW_NO_AUTO_UPDATE: 1
   ```

4. **Add concurrency control:**
   ```yaml
   concurrency:
     group: ${{ github.workflow }}-${{ github.ref }}
     cancel-in-progress: true
   ```

**Success Criteria:**
- ✅ Workflow file created with proper YAML syntax
- ✅ Triggers configured for PR, push, manual dispatch
- ✅ Two jobs defined (OpenCode + Goose)
- ✅ Environment optimizes Homebrew behavior

---

## Task 2: Install Prerequisites via Homebrew

**Purpose:** Install jq, yq, and linux-mcp-server (Homebrew pre-installed on runner)

**Steps:**

1. **Add checkout step:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Checkout repository
     uses: actions/checkout@v4
   ```

2. **Verify Homebrew:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Verify Homebrew
     run: |
       brew --version
       echo "Homebrew location: $(which brew)"
   ```

3. **Install jq:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Install jq
     run: |
       brew install jq
       jq --version
   ```

4. **Install yq:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Install yq
     run: |
       brew install yq
       yq --version
   ```

5. **Install linux-mcp-server:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Install linux-mcp-server
     run: |
       brew tap ublue-os/tap
       brew install ublue-os/tap/linux-mcp-server
       ls -la /home/linuxbrew/.linuxbrew/bin/linux-mcp-server
       echo "linux-mcp-server installed successfully"
   ```

6. **Verify all installations:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Verify Prerequisites
     run: |
       command -v jq || exit 1
       command -v yq || exit 1
       [[ -f /home/linuxbrew/.linuxbrew/bin/linux-mcp-server ]] || exit 1
       echo "✓ All prerequisites installed"
   ```

**Success Criteria:**
- ✅ jq, yq, linux-mcp-server installed successfully
- ✅ All binaries found in expected locations
- ✅ Verification step confirms installations

---

## Task 3: Simulate Bluespeed Onboarding Process

**Purpose:** Execute SKILL.md instructions inline to replicate agent behavior

**Steps:**

1. **Detect username:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Detect Username
     run: |
       USERNAME=$(whoami)
       echo "USERNAME=$USERNAME" >> $GITHUB_ENV
       echo "Detected username: $USERNAME"
   ```

2. **Setup OpenCode config directory:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Setup OpenCode Config
     run: |
       mkdir -p ~/.config/opencode
       echo '{"mcp":{}}' | jq '.' > ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json
       echo "Created default OpenCode config"
   ```

3. **Create timestamped backup:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Backup Config
     run: |
       TIMESTAMP=$(date -u +"%Y-%m-%dT%H:%M:%S")
       cp ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json.${TIMESTAMP}.backup
       echo "BACKUP_PATH=~/.config/opencode/opencode.json.${TIMESTAMP}.backup" >> $GITHUB_ENV
       echo "Backup created with timestamp: $TIMESTAMP"
   ```

4. **Merge dosu MCP configuration:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Add dosu MCP
     run: |
       jq '.mcp.dosu = {
         "type": "remote",
         "url": "https://api.dosu.dev/v1/mcp",
         "headers": {
           "X-Deployment-ID": "83775020-c22e-485a-a222-987b2f5a3823"
         }
       }' ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json > ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json.tmp
       mv ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json.tmp ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json
       echo "✓ Added dosu MCP configuration"
   ```

5. **Merge linux-mcp-server configuration:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Add linux-mcp-server
     run: |
       jq --arg user "$USERNAME" '.mcp."linux-mcp-server" = {
         "type": "stdio",
         "command": "/home/linuxbrew/.linuxbrew/bin/linux-mcp-server",
         "env": {
           "LINUX_MCP_USER": $user
         }
       }' ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json > ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json.tmp
       mv ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json.tmp ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json
       echo "✓ Added linux-mcp-server configuration (user: $USERNAME)"
   ```

**Success Criteria:**
- ✅ Username detected automatically
- ✅ Config directory created
- ✅ Timestamped backup created
- ✅ Both MCP servers added to config
- ✅ Username correctly substituted in config

---

## Task 4: Configuration Validation

**Purpose:** Verify generated configurations are structurally correct and valid

**Steps:**

1. **Validate JSON syntax:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Validate JSON
     run: |
       if jq empty ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json 2>/dev/null; then
         echo "✓ JSON validation passed"
       else
         echo "✗ JSON validation failed"
         exit 1
       fi
   ```

2. **Verify dosu MCP config structure:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Verify dosu MCP
     run: |
       jq -e '.mcp.dosu.type == "remote"' ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json
       jq -e '.mcp.dosu.url == "https://api.dosu.dev/v1/mcp"' ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json
       jq -e '.mcp.dosu.headers."X-Deployment-ID" == "83775020-c22e-485a-a222-987b2f5a3823"' ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json
       echo "✓ dosu MCP configuration verified"
   ```

3. **Verify linux-mcp-server config structure:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Verify linux-mcp-server
     run: |
       jq -e '.mcp."linux-mcp-server".type == "stdio"' ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json
       jq -e '.mcp."linux-mcp-server".command == "/home/linuxbrew/.linuxbrew/bin/linux-mcp-server"' ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json
       jq -e '.mcp."linux-mcp-server".env.LINUX_MCP_USER' ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json
       echo "✓ linux-mcp-server configuration verified"
   ```

4. **Check username substitution:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Verify Username Substitution
     run: |
       CONFIGURED_USER=$(jq -r '.mcp."linux-mcp-server".env.LINUX_MCP_USER' ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json)
       if [[ "$CONFIGURED_USER" == "$USERNAME" ]]; then
         echo "✓ Username correctly substituted: $CONFIGURED_USER"
       else
         echo "✗ Username mismatch: expected $USERNAME, got $CONFIGURED_USER"
         exit 1
       fi
   ```

5. **Display final config for debugging:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Display Final Config
     run: |
       echo "Final OpenCode configuration:"
       jq '.' ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json
   ```

**Success Criteria:**
- ✅ JSON syntax validation passes
- ✅ dosu MCP has correct type, URL, headers
- ✅ linux-mcp-server has correct type, command, env
- ✅ Username substitution works correctly
- ✅ Final config displayed for inspection

---

## Task 5: Test Error Handling & Rollback

**Purpose:** Validate backup restoration and duplicate detection work correctly

**Steps:**

1. **Test invalid JSON rollback:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Test Rollback on Invalid JSON
     run: |
       # Create test backup
       cp ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json.test.backup
       
       # Inject invalid JSON
       echo '{invalid json}' > ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json
       
       # Verify validation catches it
       if jq empty ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json 2>/dev/null; then
         echo "✗ Validation should have failed for invalid JSON"
         exit 1
       else
         echo "✓ Invalid JSON detected as expected"
       fi
       
       # Restore backup
       mv ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json.test.backup ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json
       
       # Verify restoration worked
       if jq empty ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json 2>/dev/null; then
         echo "✓ Backup restoration successful"
       else
         echo "✗ Backup restoration failed"
         exit 1
       fi
   ```

2. **Test duplicate detection:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Test Duplicate Skip Logic
     run: |
       # Verify dosu already exists
       if jq -e '.mcp.dosu' ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json >/dev/null 2>&1; then
         echo "✓ dosu MCP already exists (expected)"
       else
         echo "✗ dosu MCP should already exist"
         exit 1
       fi
       
       # Verify linux-mcp-server already exists
       if jq -e '.mcp."linux-mcp-server"' ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json >/dev/null 2>&1; then
         echo "✓ linux-mcp-server already exists (expected)"
       else
         echo "✗ linux-mcp-server should already exist"
         exit 1
       fi
   ```

3. **Test backup file exists:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Verify Backup Created
     run: |
       if [[ -f "$BACKUP_PATH" ]]; then
         echo "✓ Backup file exists: $BACKUP_PATH"
       else
         echo "✗ Backup file not found: $BACKUP_PATH"
         exit 1
       fi
   ```

**Success Criteria:**
- ✅ Invalid JSON detected by validation
- ✅ Backup restoration works correctly
- ✅ Duplicate detection logic verified
- ✅ Timestamped backup file exists

---

## Task 6: Goose Configuration Testing (Optional)

**Purpose:** Validate Goose configuration workflow (continue-on-error: true)

**Steps:**

1. **Create Goose job:**
   ```yaml
   test-goose-onboarding:
     runs-on: ubuntu-latest
     continue-on-error: true  # Goose setup is optional
   ```

2. **Setup Goose config directory:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Setup Goose Config
     run: |
       mkdir -p ~/.config/goose
       echo 'extensions: []' > ~/.config/goose/config.yaml
       echo "Created default Goose config"
   ```

3. **Merge linux-mcp-server extension:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Add linux-mcp-server Extension
     run: |
       yq eval ".extensions += [{
         \"name\": \"linux-mcp-server\",
         \"type\": \"stdio\",
         \"command\": \"/home/linuxbrew/.linuxbrew/bin/linux-mcp-server\",
         \"env\": {
           \"LINUX_MCP_USER\": \"$USERNAME\"
         }
       }]" ~/.config/goose/config.yaml > ~/.config/goose/config.yaml.tmp
       mv ~/.config/goose/config.yaml.tmp ~/.config/goose/config.yaml
       echo "✓ Added linux-mcp-server extension (user: $USERNAME)"
   ```

4. **Validate YAML:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Validate YAML
     run: |
       if yq eval '.' ~/.config/goose/config.yaml >/dev/null 2>&1; then
         echo "✓ YAML validation passed"
       else
         echo "✗ YAML validation failed"
         exit 1
       fi
   ```

5. **Display Goose config:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Display Goose Config
     run: |
       echo "Final Goose configuration:"
       yq eval '.' ~/.config/goose/config.yaml
   ```

**Success Criteria:**
- ✅ Goose config directory created
- ✅ linux-mcp-server extension added
- ✅ YAML validation passes
- ✅ Job can fail without blocking OpenCode job

---

## Task 7: Documentation & Artifacts

**Purpose:** Generate status badges, artifacts, and CI documentation

**Steps:**

1. **Generate GitHub Actions Summary:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Generate Summary
     if: always()
     run: |
       echo "## Bluespeed Onboarding Test Results" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "### Prerequisites" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "- ✅ Homebrew: $(brew --version | head -1)" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "- ✅ jq: $(jq --version)" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "- ✅ yq: $(yq --version)" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "- ✅ linux-mcp-server: Installed" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "### Configuration" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "- ✅ OpenCode config created" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "- ✅ dosu MCP configured" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "- ✅ linux-mcp-server configured" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "- ✅ Username detected: $USERNAME" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "### Validation" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "- ✅ JSON syntax valid" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "- ✅ Configuration structure verified" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "- ✅ Error handling tested" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
   ```

2. **Archive OpenCode logs (if they exist):**
   ```yaml
   - name: Archive Logs
     if: always()
     uses: actions/upload-artifact@v4
     with:
       name: opencode-logs
       path: ~/.config/opencode/logs/
       if-no-files-found: ignore
   ```

3. **Archive generated configs:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Archive Configs
     if: always()
     uses: actions/upload-artifact@v4
     with:
       name: test-configs
       path: |
         ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json
         ~/.config/opencode/*.backup
       if-no-files-found: ignore
   ```

4. **Create `docs/ci-cd.md` documenting:**
   - What the workflow validates
   - How to run locally using act: `act -W .github/workflows/test-onboarding.yml`
   - Troubleshooting common failures
   - Badge markdown for README

5. **Add workflow status badge to README.md:**
   ```markdown
   [![Onboarding Test](https://github.com/castrojo/bluespeed/actions/workflows/test-onboarding.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/castrojo/bluespeed/actions/workflows/test-onboarding.yml)
   ```

**Success Criteria:**
- ✅ GitHub Actions summary generated
- ✅ Logs and configs archived as artifacts
- ✅ CI documentation created
- ✅ Status badge added to README

---

## Future Enhancements (Post-MVP)

### Matrix Testing
Add matrix strategy to test multiple scenarios:
```yaml
strategy:
  matrix:
    scenario:
      - clean-install    # Fresh config
      - existing-config  # Pre-existing dosu or linux-mcp-server
      - partial-config   # Only one MCP server exists
```

### MCP Server Health Checks
Once OpenCode supports headless mode:
- Start OpenCode with test flag
- Check logs for MCP server initialization
- Verify dosu connects to remote API
- Verify linux-mcp-server starts stdio connection

### Performance Benchmarks
- Track installation time
- Track config generation time
- Fail if operations exceed reasonable thresholds

### Nightly Extended Tests
- Full OpenCode session startup
- Actual MCP server connection testing
- End-to-end workflow validation

### Notification Integration
- Slack/Discord alerts on failures
- Email notifications for main branch failures

---

## Success Criteria

After implementing this epic:

- ✅ GitHub Actions workflow file exists at `.github/workflows/test-onboarding.yml`
- ✅ Workflow runs on PR, push to main, and manual dispatch
- ✅ All prerequisites install successfully via Homebrew
- ✅ OpenCode configuration generated matches SKILL.md specification
- ✅ Goose configuration tested (optional, non-blocking)
- ✅ JSON/YAML validation passes
- ✅ dosu and linux-mcp-server configs structurally correct
- ✅ Username substitution works correctly
- ✅ Backup/rollback mechanism tested
- ✅ Duplicate detection verified
- ✅ Status badge added to README
- ✅ Logs and configs archived as artifacts
- ✅ CI documentation created in `docs/ci-cd.md`
- ✅ All jobs pass (green checkmark on GitHub)

---

## Notes for Future Agents

### Why Config Validation Only (No MCP Connection Testing)

**Decision:** Validate configuration structure without attempting MCP server connections.

**Reasons:**
1. **OpenCode doesn't support headless mode yet** - Requires GUI/X11 for startup
2. **MCP connection requires running OpenCode** - Not feasible in standard CI
3. **Config structure validation is sufficient** - Catches 95% of onboarding issues
4. **Fast feedback** - Config tests complete in seconds vs minutes for full startup

**What We Validate:**
- ✅ Prerequisites installed correctly
- ✅ Config files have correct JSON/YAML syntax
- ✅ MCP server definitions have correct structure
- ✅ Username substitution works
- ✅ Backup/rollback mechanisms function

**What We Defer:**
- ⏭️ Actual MCP server connections (requires headless OpenCode)
- ⏭️ OpenCode startup verification (requires GUI environment)
- ⏭️ End-to-end workflow testing (requires full OpenCode session)

**When to Add Connection Testing:**
Once OpenCode supports headless mode (e.g., `opencode --test` flag), add Task 8 to verify MCP servers actually connect.

### Local Testing with act

To run this workflow locally:

```bash
# Install act
brew install act

# Run workflow
act -W .github/workflows/test-onboarding.yml

# Run specific job
act -j test-opencode-onboarding

# Use different runner image
act --container-architecture linux/amd64
```

### Debugging Failures

**Common issues:**

1. **Homebrew package not found** → Check tap is correct: `brew tap ublue-os/tap`
2. **jq command fails** → Check JSON syntax in config step
3. **Username not substituted** → Check `$USERNAME` env var set correctly
4. **Validation fails** → Check jq query syntax and expected values

**Debug steps:**

```bash
# View workflow runs
gh run list --workflow=test-onboarding.yml

# View specific run
gh run view <run-id>

# Download artifacts
gh run download <run-id>
```

Commit message:

docs: link epic #9 to containerized GitHub Actions plan

docs/plans/2026-02-11-containerized-github-actions-onboarding-test.md, after:

# Containerized GitHub Actions Onboarding Test

> **Epic Issue:** #9
> **Sub-Tasks:** (to be created by implementing agent)

> **For Claude:** REQUIRED SUB-SKILL: Use superpowers:executing-plans to implement this plan task-by-task.

**Goal:** Build a GitHub Actions workflow that validates the entire bluespeed-onboarding process in a clean Ubuntu environment, ensuring reliable onboarding for new Bluefin maintainers. This workflow will run on every PR and push to main, providing immediate feedback on configuration changes.

**Architecture:** GitHub Actions native workflow using Ubuntu runners (Homebrew pre-installed), executing SKILL.md instructions inline to simulate agent onboarding flow, validating all configurations without requiring MCP server connections.

**Tech Stack:** GitHub Actions, Ubuntu latest runner, Homebrew (pre-installed), jq/yq validation, configuration structure verification

## Why Traditional CI (Not Agentic Actions)

**Decision: Use standard GitHub Actions**

### Rationale for Traditional Approach

**Pros of Traditional GitHub Actions:**
- ✅ **Deterministic** - Same inputs always produce same outputs
- ✅ **Fast** - Cached dependencies, parallel execution
- ✅ **Debuggable** - Clear logs, established tooling
- ✅ **Cost-effective** - Free for public repos, no API calls
- ✅ **Transparent** - Anyone can inspect workflow files
- ✅ **Native integration** - Status checks, badges, branch protection

**Cons of Agentic Actions:**
- ❌ **Non-deterministic** - Agent decisions vary run-to-run
- ❌ **Complex** - Testing agent reliability becomes meta-problem
- ❌ **Costly** - API calls accumulate (OpenAI, Anthropic)
- ❌ **Overkill** - This workflow is linear/procedural
- ❌ **Maintenance** - Agentic frameworks change rapidly

**When Agentic Actions WOULD Make Sense:**
- Adaptive test generation (exploring edge cases dynamically)
- Complex debugging workflows (agent analyzes failures)
- Multi-step integrations (agent coordinates across systems)
- Intelligent triage (agent categorizes failures)

**This workflow is straightforward validation** → Traditional CI is the right tool.

---

## Task 1: Create GitHub Actions Workflow File

**File:** `.github/workflows/test-onboarding.yml`

**Purpose:** Define CI pipeline that validates onboarding in clean environment

**Steps:**

1. **Create workflow directory**
   ```bash
   mkdir -p .github/workflows
   ```

2. **Create `test-onboarding.yml` with:**
   - **Name:** "Bluespeed Onboarding Test"
   - **Triggers:**
     - `push` to `main` branch
     - `pull_request` to `main` branch  
     - `workflow_dispatch` (manual trigger for testing)
   - **Jobs:**
     - `test-opencode-onboarding` - Validates OpenCode setup
     - `test-goose-onboarding` - Validates Goose setup (optional, continue-on-error)
   - **Runner:** `ubuntu-latest` (Homebrew pre-installed by GitHub)
   - **Permissions:** `contents: read` (read-only access)

3. **Add environment variables:**
   ```yaml
   env:
     HOMEBREW_NO_INSTALL_CLEANUP: 1
     HOMEBREW_NO_AUTO_UPDATE: 1
   ```

4. **Add concurrency control:**
   ```yaml
   concurrency:
     group: ${{ github.workflow }}-${{ github.ref }}
     cancel-in-progress: true
   ```

**Success Criteria:**
- ✅ Workflow file created with proper YAML syntax
- ✅ Triggers configured for PR, push, manual dispatch
- ✅ Two jobs defined (OpenCode + Goose)
- ✅ Environment optimizes Homebrew behavior

---

## Task 2: Install Prerequisites via Homebrew

**Purpose:** Install jq, yq, and linux-mcp-server (Homebrew pre-installed on runner)

**Steps:**

1. **Add checkout step:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Checkout repository
     uses: actions/checkout@v4
   ```

2. **Verify Homebrew:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Verify Homebrew
     run: |
       brew --version
       echo "Homebrew location: $(which brew)"
   ```

3. **Install jq:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Install jq
     run: |
       brew install jq
       jq --version
   ```

4. **Install yq:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Install yq
     run: |
       brew install yq
       yq --version
   ```

5. **Install linux-mcp-server:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Install linux-mcp-server
     run: |
       brew tap ublue-os/tap
       brew install ublue-os/tap/linux-mcp-server
       ls -la /home/linuxbrew/.linuxbrew/bin/linux-mcp-server
       echo "linux-mcp-server installed successfully"
   ```

6. **Verify all installations:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Verify Prerequisites
     run: |
       command -v jq || exit 1
       command -v yq || exit 1
       [[ -f /home/linuxbrew/.linuxbrew/bin/linux-mcp-server ]] || exit 1
       echo "✓ All prerequisites installed"
   ```

**Success Criteria:**
- ✅ jq, yq, linux-mcp-server installed successfully
- ✅ All binaries found in expected locations
- ✅ Verification step confirms installations

---

## Task 3: Simulate Bluespeed Onboarding Process

**Purpose:** Execute SKILL.md instructions inline to replicate agent behavior

**Steps:**

1. **Detect username:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Detect Username
     run: |
       USERNAME=$(whoami)
       echo "USERNAME=$USERNAME" >> $GITHUB_ENV
       echo "Detected username: $USERNAME"
   ```

2. **Setup OpenCode config directory:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Setup OpenCode Config
     run: |
       mkdir -p ~/.config/opencode
       echo '{"mcp":{}}' | jq '.' > ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json
       echo "Created default OpenCode config"
   ```

3. **Create timestamped backup:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Backup Config
     run: |
       TIMESTAMP=$(date -u +"%Y-%m-%dT%H:%M:%S")
       cp ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json.${TIMESTAMP}.backup
       echo "BACKUP_PATH=~/.config/opencode/opencode.json.${TIMESTAMP}.backup" >> $GITHUB_ENV
       echo "Backup created with timestamp: $TIMESTAMP"
   ```

4. **Merge dosu MCP configuration:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Add dosu MCP
     run: |
       jq '.mcp.dosu = {
         "type": "remote",
         "url": "https://api.dosu.dev/v1/mcp",
         "headers": {
           "X-Deployment-ID": "83775020-c22e-485a-a222-987b2f5a3823"
         }
       }' ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json > ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json.tmp
       mv ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json.tmp ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json
       echo "✓ Added dosu MCP configuration"
   ```

5. **Merge linux-mcp-server configuration:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Add linux-mcp-server
     run: |
       jq --arg user "$USERNAME" '.mcp."linux-mcp-server" = {
         "type": "stdio",
         "command": "/home/linuxbrew/.linuxbrew/bin/linux-mcp-server",
         "env": {
           "LINUX_MCP_USER": $user
         }
       }' ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json > ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json.tmp
       mv ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json.tmp ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json
       echo "✓ Added linux-mcp-server configuration (user: $USERNAME)"
   ```

**Success Criteria:**
- ✅ Username detected automatically
- ✅ Config directory created
- ✅ Timestamped backup created
- ✅ Both MCP servers added to config
- ✅ Username correctly substituted in config

---

## Task 4: Configuration Validation

**Purpose:** Verify generated configurations are structurally correct and valid

**Steps:**

1. **Validate JSON syntax:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Validate JSON
     run: |
       if jq empty ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json 2>/dev/null; then
         echo "✓ JSON validation passed"
       else
         echo "✗ JSON validation failed"
         exit 1
       fi
   ```

2. **Verify dosu MCP config structure:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Verify dosu MCP
     run: |
       jq -e '.mcp.dosu.type == "remote"' ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json
       jq -e '.mcp.dosu.url == "https://api.dosu.dev/v1/mcp"' ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json
       jq -e '.mcp.dosu.headers."X-Deployment-ID" == "83775020-c22e-485a-a222-987b2f5a3823"' ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json
       echo "✓ dosu MCP configuration verified"
   ```

3. **Verify linux-mcp-server config structure:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Verify linux-mcp-server
     run: |
       jq -e '.mcp."linux-mcp-server".type == "stdio"' ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json
       jq -e '.mcp."linux-mcp-server".command == "/home/linuxbrew/.linuxbrew/bin/linux-mcp-server"' ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json
       jq -e '.mcp."linux-mcp-server".env.LINUX_MCP_USER' ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json
       echo "✓ linux-mcp-server configuration verified"
   ```

4. **Check username substitution:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Verify Username Substitution
     run: |
       CONFIGURED_USER=$(jq -r '.mcp."linux-mcp-server".env.LINUX_MCP_USER' ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json)
       if [[ "$CONFIGURED_USER" == "$USERNAME" ]]; then
         echo "✓ Username correctly substituted: $CONFIGURED_USER"
       else
         echo "✗ Username mismatch: expected $USERNAME, got $CONFIGURED_USER"
         exit 1
       fi
   ```

5. **Display final config for debugging:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Display Final Config
     run: |
       echo "Final OpenCode configuration:"
       jq '.' ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json
   ```

**Success Criteria:**
- ✅ JSON syntax validation passes
- ✅ dosu MCP has correct type, URL, headers
- ✅ linux-mcp-server has correct type, command, env
- ✅ Username substitution works correctly
- ✅ Final config displayed for inspection

---

## Task 5: Test Error Handling & Rollback

**Purpose:** Validate backup restoration and duplicate detection work correctly

**Steps:**

1. **Test invalid JSON rollback:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Test Rollback on Invalid JSON
     run: |
       # Create test backup
       cp ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json.test.backup
       
       # Inject invalid JSON
       echo '{invalid json}' > ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json
       
       # Verify validation catches it
       if jq empty ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json 2>/dev/null; then
         echo "✗ Validation should have failed for invalid JSON"
         exit 1
       else
         echo "✓ Invalid JSON detected as expected"
       fi
       
       # Restore backup
       mv ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json.test.backup ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json
       
       # Verify restoration worked
       if jq empty ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json 2>/dev/null; then
         echo "✓ Backup restoration successful"
       else
         echo "✗ Backup restoration failed"
         exit 1
       fi
   ```

2. **Test duplicate detection:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Test Duplicate Skip Logic
     run: |
       # Verify dosu already exists
       if jq -e '.mcp.dosu' ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json >/dev/null 2>&1; then
         echo "✓ dosu MCP already exists (expected)"
       else
         echo "✗ dosu MCP should already exist"
         exit 1
       fi
       
       # Verify linux-mcp-server already exists
       if jq -e '.mcp."linux-mcp-server"' ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json >/dev/null 2>&1; then
         echo "✓ linux-mcp-server already exists (expected)"
       else
         echo "✗ linux-mcp-server should already exist"
         exit 1
       fi
   ```

3. **Test backup file exists:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Verify Backup Created
     run: |
       if [[ -f "$BACKUP_PATH" ]]; then
         echo "✓ Backup file exists: $BACKUP_PATH"
       else
         echo "✗ Backup file not found: $BACKUP_PATH"
         exit 1
       fi
   ```

**Success Criteria:**
- ✅ Invalid JSON detected by validation
- ✅ Backup restoration works correctly
- ✅ Duplicate detection logic verified
- ✅ Timestamped backup file exists

---

## Task 6: Goose Configuration Testing (Optional)

**Purpose:** Validate Goose configuration workflow (continue-on-error: true)

**Steps:**

1. **Create Goose job:**
   ```yaml
   test-goose-onboarding:
     runs-on: ubuntu-latest
     continue-on-error: true  # Goose setup is optional
   ```

2. **Setup Goose config directory:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Setup Goose Config
     run: |
       mkdir -p ~/.config/goose
       echo 'extensions: []' > ~/.config/goose/config.yaml
       echo "Created default Goose config"
   ```

3. **Merge linux-mcp-server extension:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Add linux-mcp-server Extension
     run: |
       yq eval ".extensions += [{
         \"name\": \"linux-mcp-server\",
         \"type\": \"stdio\",
         \"command\": \"/home/linuxbrew/.linuxbrew/bin/linux-mcp-server\",
         \"env\": {
           \"LINUX_MCP_USER\": \"$USERNAME\"
         }
       }]" ~/.config/goose/config.yaml > ~/.config/goose/config.yaml.tmp
       mv ~/.config/goose/config.yaml.tmp ~/.config/goose/config.yaml
       echo "✓ Added linux-mcp-server extension (user: $USERNAME)"
   ```

4. **Validate YAML:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Validate YAML
     run: |
       if yq eval '.' ~/.config/goose/config.yaml >/dev/null 2>&1; then
         echo "✓ YAML validation passed"
       else
         echo "✗ YAML validation failed"
         exit 1
       fi
   ```

5. **Display Goose config:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Display Goose Config
     run: |
       echo "Final Goose configuration:"
       yq eval '.' ~/.config/goose/config.yaml
   ```

**Success Criteria:**
- ✅ Goose config directory created
- ✅ linux-mcp-server extension added
- ✅ YAML validation passes
- ✅ Job can fail without blocking OpenCode job

---

## Task 7: Documentation & Artifacts

**Purpose:** Generate status badges, artifacts, and CI documentation

**Steps:**

1. **Generate GitHub Actions Summary:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Generate Summary
     if: always()
     run: |
       echo "## Bluespeed Onboarding Test Results" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "### Prerequisites" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "- ✅ Homebrew: $(brew --version | head -1)" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "- ✅ jq: $(jq --version)" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "- ✅ yq: $(yq --version)" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "- ✅ linux-mcp-server: Installed" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "### Configuration" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "- ✅ OpenCode config created" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "- ✅ dosu MCP configured" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "- ✅ linux-mcp-server configured" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "- ✅ Username detected: $USERNAME" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "### Validation" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "- ✅ JSON syntax valid" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "- ✅ Configuration structure verified" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
       echo "- ✅ Error handling tested" >> $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY
   ```

2. **Archive OpenCode logs (if they exist):**
   ```yaml
   - name: Archive Logs
     if: always()
     uses: actions/upload-artifact@v4
     with:
       name: opencode-logs
       path: ~/.config/opencode/logs/
       if-no-files-found: ignore
   ```

3. **Archive generated configs:**
   ```yaml
   - name: Archive Configs
     if: always()
     uses: actions/upload-artifact@v4
     with:
       name: test-configs
       path: |
         ~/.config/opencode/opencode.json
         ~/.config/opencode/*.backup
       if-no-files-found: ignore
   ```

4. **Create `docs/ci-cd.md` documenting:**
   - What the workflow validates
   - How to run locally using act: `act -W .github/workflows/test-onboarding.yml`
   - Troubleshooting common failures
   - Badge markdown for README

5. **Add workflow status badge to README.md:**
   ```markdown
   [![Onboarding Test](https://github.com/castrojo/bluespeed/actions/workflows/test-onboarding.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/castrojo/bluespeed/actions/workflows/test-onboarding.yml)
   ```

**Success Criteria:**
- ✅ GitHub Actions summary generated
- ✅ Logs and configs archived as artifacts
- ✅ CI documentation created
- ✅ Status badge added to README

---

## Future Enhancements (Post-MVP)

### Matrix Testing
Add matrix strategy to test multiple scenarios:
```yaml
strategy:
  matrix:
    scenario:
      - clean-install    # Fresh config
      - existing-config  # Pre-existing dosu or linux-mcp-server
      - partial-config   # Only one MCP server exists
```

### MCP Server Health Checks
Once OpenCode supports headless mode:
- Start OpenCode with test flag
- Check logs for MCP server initialization
- Verify dosu connects to remote API
- Verify linux-mcp-server starts stdio connection

### Performance Benchmarks
- Track installation time
- Track config generation time
- Fail if operations exceed reasonable thresholds

### Nightly Extended Tests
- Full OpenCode session startup
- Actual MCP server connection testing
- End-to-end workflow validation

### Notification Integration
- Slack/Discord alerts on failures
- Email notifications for main branch failures

---

## Success Criteria

After implementing this epic:

- ✅ GitHub Actions workflow file exists at `.github/workflows/test-onboarding.yml`
- ✅ Workflow runs on PR, push to main, and manual dispatch
- ✅ All prerequisites install successfully via Homebrew
- ✅ OpenCode configuration generated matches SKILL.md specification
- ✅ Goose configuration tested (optional, non-blocking)
- ✅ JSON/YAML validation passes
- ✅ dosu and linux-mcp-server configs structurally correct
- ✅ Username substitution works correctly
- ✅ Backup/rollback mechanism tested
- ✅ Duplicate detection verified
- ✅ Status badge added to README
- ✅ Logs and configs archived as artifacts
- ✅ CI documentation created in `docs/ci-cd.md`
- ✅ All jobs pass (green checkmark on GitHub)

---

## Notes for Future Agents

### Why Config Validation Only (No MCP Connection Testing)

**Decision:** Validate configuration structure without attempting MCP server connections.

**Reasons:**
1. **OpenCode doesn't support headless mode yet** - Requires GUI/X11 for startup
2. **MCP connection requires running OpenCode** - Not feasible in standard CI
3. **Config structure validation is sufficient** - Catches 95% of onboarding issues
4. **Fast feedback** - Config tests complete in seconds vs minutes for full startup

**What We Validate:**
- ✅ Prerequisites installed correctly
- ✅ Config files have correct JSON/YAML syntax
- ✅ MCP server definitions have correct structure
- ✅ Username substitution works
- ✅ Backup/rollback mechanisms function

**What We Defer:**
- ⏭️ Actual MCP server connections (requires headless OpenCode)
- ⏭️ OpenCode startup verification (requires GUI environment)
- ⏭️ End-to-end workflow testing (requires full OpenCode session)

**When to Add Connection Testing:**
Once OpenCode supports headless mode (e.g., `opencode --test` flag), add Task 8 to verify MCP servers actually connect.

### Local Testing with act

To run this workflow locally:

```bash
# Install act
brew install act

# Run workflow
act -W .github/workflows/test-onboarding.yml

# Run specific job
act -j test-opencode-onboarding

# Use different runner image
act --container-architecture linux/amd64
```

### Debugging Failures

**Common issues:**

1. **Homebrew package not found** → Check tap is correct: `brew tap ublue-os/tap`
2. **jq command fails** → Check JSON syntax in config step
3. **Username not substituted** → Check `$USERNAME` env var set correctly
4. **Validation fails** → Check jq query syntax and expected values

**Debug steps:**

```bash
# View workflow runs
gh run list --workflow=test-onboarding.yml

# View specific run
gh run view <run-id>

# Download artifacts
gh run download <run-id>
```
